Is global warming a hoax?
What if the Earthis actually getting cooler?
The climate has always been changing,
so what’s the big deal?
Myths and disinformation about
climate change are all around us.
But while it can be acontroversial and
politically charged topic in some parts of the world,
the climate crisis is
not a matter of opinion,
or about which political party you support.
It’s rooted in hard evidencethat scientists
have been collecting for decades.
So today, we’re going to debunk 10 of the
mostcommon climate change myths.
Let’s dive right in.
Myth number 1: global warming stopped in 1998.
Here’s a chart showing average global
temperatures since the year 1880,
which clearly shows that the Earth has
gotten warmer, especially since the 1920s.
Here’s another view of the same data,
but thistime stretching back to 1850,
which again shows a warming trend
over the last 100 years.
But wait a minute. What if we zoom in
to take a closer look at the data,
let’ssay, for the period between 1998 and 2012?
If we only look at that period, theEarth
hasn’t gotten any warmer since 1998!
Well, first of all, that’s cherry picking.
Butit is true that the Earth did warm more slowly
during the period from 1998 to 2012
than it did inthe 20 to 30 years prior.
And yes, global warming slowed down,
but it certainly didn’t stop.
Climate scientists call it
a “global warming hiatus”,
and it was mainly caused by a naturalcycle in the
Pacific Ocean called El Niño–Southern Oscillation.
There was also a decrease in energy
from the sun, which we’ll talk about later.
The reason it’s called a hiatus is that
theslowdown was only temporary,
and since 2012, the planet has
continued to warm faster than ever.
In fact, each of the last nine years, from 2013 to 2021,
rank among the 10 hottest years on record
– not to mention that the period from 2011 to
2020 was the hottest decade ever recorded.
So no, global warming didn’t stop in the 90s.
In fact, every single year since2013
has been even hotter than 1998.
Myth number 2: Global warming has stopped,
andthe world is getting cooler.
And chances are, it’s cold
where you are right now!
So, let’s just ignore all of the signs
that the Earth is getting hotter,
fromrising air, land and sea
temperatures to rising sea levels
to melting glaciers to springarriving earlier…
and let’s focus instead on the fact
that it gets cold sometimes!
There’s a big difference
between weatherand climate.
Weather is what it’s like right now– whether
it’s hot or cold, sunny or cloudy, rainy or dry.
Climate is about long-term averages: it's about how the
weather usually is at a given place and time.
And the reason we call it “climate change”and not
“weather change” is that the Earth as awhole
is getting hotter over a span of decades
– not necessarily everywhere and every day.
So, there will still be cold days even though
the Earth is getting hotter overall.
In fact,we’re probably going to see even
more extremeweather
not just in summer but also inwinter.
As the Arctic gets hotter,
it’s destabilizing the polar vortex,
bringing freezing temperatures to
places that don’t normally see snow,
like Texas and northern Mexico. In other
words: global warming can be cold, too.
But wait a minute: how do we know that it’s
going to continue to get warmer?
Scientistsrely on models
to predict climate change.
Myth number 3 is that
those models aren’t reliable,
and that scientists wronglypredicted
an ice age back in the 1970s.
Models are mathematical representations
of realitythat can be used to estimate general trends.
Climate modeling is a lot like weather
forecasting:
it makes predictions basedon things like wind patterns,
ocean currents,and changes in temperature,
only that thesepredictions take place
over a much longer spanof time,
usually decades or even centuries.
We can already tell how accurate
a climate modelis by hindcasting,
which means running it usingdata from
the past to see how well it can predict
events and trends that have already happened.
It turns out the models used by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
have been pretty accurate atpredicting
temperature changes since 1970,
which they managed to hindcast
to within8%–17%.
And in this recent study,14 out of 17 models managed
to accuratelypredict global warming between 1970 and 2007.
But back to the whole ice age saga:
Back in thelate 1960s and 70s, only a few studies
predicted that the Earth would get cooler.
The vast majorityquite rightly
thought it would get warmer.
Myth number 4: Antarctica is
gaining ice rather than losing it.
Most scientists agree that the eastern part
ofAntarctica is gaining mass in the form of either
ice, snowfall, or both. That’s because
as thecontinent gets warmer,
it’s becoming more humid,
leading to increased snowfall.
West Antarctica, onthe other hand,
is losing mass faster than ever
as global warming causes its glaciers to melt,
which is contributing to rising sea levels.
But back in 2015, NASA published a study that
contradicted every other study up to that point.
It found that Antarctica is gaining ice overall
because snowfall in East Antarctica is increasing
more quickly than glaciers in
West Antarctica aremelting.
The study concluded that Antarctica was
not contributing to rising sea levels as a result.
The NASA study was instantly picked up by
conservative news outlets like Fox News
andBreitbart as proof that
global warming wasn’treal.
But other scientists quickly pointedout
some issues with the study’s methodology,
and many more recent studies have found
that the NASA study probably overestimated
how quickly East Antarctica is gaining mass.
Today, the scientific consensus is that
Antarctica is still losing ice overall,
and the NASAstudy is the only one
that suggests otherwise.
That brings us onto myth number 5:
scientistsaren’t really sure if climate change is real,
and there’s no scientific consensus.
But multiple studies have shown that
at least 90%of climate scientists agree
that climate change isnot only real
but also primarily caused by humans.
There have been four studies that find that
97% of publishing climatologists agree with
that statement, while other studies put
that figure at 91%, 93%, 99%, or even 100%.
What’s interesting about these studies is that
they found that the more qualified an expert is,
the more likely they are to
agree with theconsensus.
Climatologists who publish regularly inpeer-reviewed journals
are the most likely to saythat climate change is mainly caused by humans,
while among non-publishing climatologists,
thatconsensus drops to 66%–87%.
And let’s not forget the crown
jewel of climate science, the IPCC,
which brings together hundreds of leading experts
to produce the definitive assessments
on climatechange.
According to its latest report,not only are
humans causing climate change,
but we’re already suffering the effects
of more frequent disasters like droughts,
heatwaves and floods, which are only going
to get worse if we don’t act quickly.
Myth number 6: so, we’ve established
that global warming is real.
But whatif it’s just some sort of natural phenomenon?
Well, here’s the Earth’s atmosphere, which
keepsus warm by trapping heat from the sun
using gaseslike carbon dioxide,
methane and ozone,
which arecollectively known
as greenhouse gases,
and theirwarming effect is known as the greenhouse effect.
If the Earth didn’t have an atmosphere, it
would be around 33°C colder than it really is,
making it almost totally uninhabitable for humans.
Temperature and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
have been closely linked throughout the Earth’shistory.
During the Eocene, which was between
56 million and 34 million years ago,
carbondioxide levels were almost
four times higherthan they are today,
at around 1,500 parts permillion, which is why
temperatures were about 10°C hotter.
During the last ice age, on theother hand,
they were between 180 and 300 ppm.
But here’s where we come in: each year, humans
are emitting about 9.5 billion metric tons of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere
by burningfossil fuels,
plus an additional 1.5 billion tons
through deforestation.
Today,carbon dioxide levels are the highest
they’ve been in 800,000 years, at 420 ppm.
That’s why the Earth has gotten about
1.2°Chotter since the late 19th century.
It’s almostdouble the warming
at the end of the last ice age,
and it’s happening at least 100 times
faster. The only reason for that is us.
That is, unless you believe myth number 7:
the sunis burning brighter
and making the Earth hotter.
The sun’s energy has actually been
decreasing since the 1980s,
and yetthe Earth is still getting hotter.
If the sun were getting brighter,
we would see that reflected across
the entire atmosphere. But instead,
only the lower atmosphere is getting warmer
while the upper atmosphere is getting cooler,
and that’s because more and more heat is
being trapped in the lower atmosphere
bythe greenhouse gases that we’re emitting.
But in any case, solar fluctuations onlyhave a
very minor impact on the Earth’stemperature
– in the range of about0.1°C at most.
So, there’s no way it couldhave caused
the 1.2°C of warming so far.
So, remember how I said that the Earth used
to be10°C hotter back in the Eocene?
Myth number 8: the climate is
constantly changing,
and it has been warmerin the past,
so it’s no big deal, right?
There are natural cycles that cause the Earth’sclimate
to fluctuate between cooler and warmerperiods.
For instance, the El Niño–SouthernOscillation (ENSO)
is a climate pattern in the Pacific Ocean
consisting of a warm phase
called El Niño and a cool phase called La Niña,
and it swings back and forth between the
two phases every 3–7 years.
And the Earth also fluctuates between
cold periods, otherwise known as ice ages,
and warmer periods, known as interglacials,
roughly every 100,000 years
due to what are known as Milankovitch cycles,
which arefluctuations in the Earth’s orbit and tilt.
But the warming that we’re seeing today
isn’tpart of any of these natural cycles.
The Earth hasn’t been this hot in at least
12,000years – and perhaps even 125,000 years.
And on that note, here’s myth number 9:
thebenefits from climate change outweigh the costs.
It’s true that a few regions of the world
could experience benefits from climate change.
Canada and Russia, for instance,
could gain huge areas of farmland
that arecurrently too cold for farming, as wellas
new shipping routes across the ArcticOcean.
But even those countries are already
suffering from melting permafrost
and ragingwildfires in the Arctic, which is warming
twice as quickly as the rest of the Earth.
And for everyone else, there aren’t really
any benefits from climate change.
Accordingto the latest IPCC report, over 40% of
the world’spopulation is “highly vulnerable”,
and by that, they mean half the world currently suffers
from water shortages at some point every year,
one in three people are exposed
to deadly heatstress,
a billion people could be affected
byrising sea levels by 2050,
and an extra 180million people will go hungry by 2050
due tocrop failure caused by extreme weather.
So, the climate has changed before,
but humans have never experienced
this muchwarming this quickly,
and it’s going to be rough.
And lastly, myth number 10:
climate change solutions aretoo expensive
and would hurt the economy.
According to this study, the world could lose up to
18% of its GDPby 2050 if we do nothing,
and 11% even if wemanage to keep
global warming to 2°C.
And by 2100, climate change could cost 37%
of global GDP, based on this study.
But we don’t even have to look
thatfar into the future.
In just the next fiveyears,
companies will lose US$1.2 trillion
to supply chain disruption from climate change.
On the other hand, it could cost
less than 1% ofglobal GDP
to mitigate climate change by 2030
using cost-effective solutions
like improvingenergy efficiency,
expanding renewable energy,
and restoring forests and degraded landscapes.
So, there you have it: next time you hear someone
repeating any of these myths, you know the drill:
send them this video. And if you like what
you saw, don’t forget to drop us a like,
leave us a comment, and hit that subscribe
button for more episodes of Landscape TV.
Thanks for watching, and
we’ll see you on the next one.